S.no,Use Case,Detailed description,Expected Outcomes/Business value,Clinical Practice Tower,Problem Statement,Solution,POC,Account,Implementation procedure
1,Patient Identification and Patient Outcomes,Identifying suitable patients for clinical trials based on social media data and other unstructured data. Predicting patient outcomes and treatment responses by analyzing unstructured clinical notes.,"Identify patients who are susceptible or likely to respond to treatment, thereby reducing risks and adverse events. Enhances patient's journey in clinical trials. Enhanced Targeting: Generative AI can help pharmaceutical companies target the right patients for their studies.",CLINICAL DMS,Patient identification is one of the most important yet difficult task in setting up a clinical trial,,,,Improved Efficiency, Cost Savings, Improved Data Quality and Better Patient Outcomes
2,Development of synthetic control arms and Synthetic Data,"Placebo groups can be modeled based on historical information. In cases where a synthetic control arm is suitable, a reduced need for a real-life placebo group can save costs and facilitate increased sizes of treatment arms of clinical trials. If a trial is recruiting 10,000 participants in a treatment arm and 10,000 participants in a control arm, a novel trial methodology could instead utilize 15,000 in the treatment arm, 5,000 in the control arm with 10,000 synthetic cases supplementing that control group. Synthetic data is to protect patient privacy and increase the scope for institutions to share data openly.","This would be particularly useful when trials are performed on patient groups with limited overall population sizes. No single synthetic data point is attributable to any individual patient but the overall patterns within the dataset can be maintained. Since no real patient data is being shared, the data can be shared freely and protects patient privacy.",CLINICAL DMS,"Placebo are used Clinical trials for testing drugs as a regular feature but are not a popular among patients enrolled and may induce attrition/non-adherence hence alternative such as synthetic control arms can be used. In medical device clinical research, placebo is very rarely used and synthetic control arm provides a good alternative",,,,
3,Clinical Data Review,Leverage Gen AI to automate data review.,Ensures that data review is done as close to real time as possible. Reduces effort to program/maintain a large volume of programmed checks. Ensures that critical data insights are not missed or overlooked,CLINICAL DMS,"In current process, business rule validation checks are performed based on checks defined in specification. Key insights are missed if the specification does not have the corresponding checks. Th SDTM and Stats validation are performed during the milestones.",Create a Gen AI solution to automate a significant percentage of data review that is currently done manually. This includes automated generation of data review specifications. To validate the data based on SDTM and Stats validation rules.,,,
4,Clinical Data Discrepancy Validation(CDV),"To automate discrepancy validation based on the Edit check specification (IDRP), source (EDC & Vendor Data) and target data.(LSH/SAM)","To automate discrepancy validation based on the Edit check specification (IDRP), source (EDC & Vendor Data) and target data.(LSH/SAM). Analyze the discrepancies fired in (ECE/SDQ-JARVIS) and identify the issues and assigning the correct status given below for each discrepancies to the respective stakeholders. Output report will help individual stake holders to review/analyze/fix their issues respectively",CLINICAL DMS,"Currently, after the Discrepancies are fired in (ECE/SDQ-JARVIS), Data Managers manually review the discrepancies and assign the status. It is a time-consuming process as done by Data managers manually It is a challenging task while performing Data cleaning activities for critical milestones",,,,
5,Site Selection Assistant,"An AI tool for site selection can help optimize site selection by analyzing various data sources (internal, external) and providing recommendations for the best sites that match the trial criteria and goals.",Reduce Site Selection timeline and meet patient recruitment targets,CLINICAL DMS,"Site selection is a time-consuming and costly process that involves evaluating multiple criteria and data sources. An AI tool can automate and optimize this process by finding the best sites that match the trial objectives, budget, and timeline, and provide a rationale for the recommendations.",,,,
6,Boosting clinical trial retention with Gen AI,"GEN AI can help improve patient retention in clinical trials. Firstly, it can personalize communication with patients, reminding them of appointments, providing helpful information about the trial, and addressing any concerns they may have. Secondly, it can analyze data to identify patterns that may indicate which patients are at risk of dropping out, allowing researchers to intervene early and provide additional support. Lastly, it can streamline the trial process by automating certain tasks, making it easier for patients to participate and stay engaged.",Early identification of drop-out risks. Timely interventions enhance patient retention. Gen AI - Personalized engagement strategies and support. Saves Cost and effort.,CLINICAL DMS,Maintaining high subject retention rates is crucial for the validity and success of research studies and clinical trails 85% of clinical trials fail to retain enough patients 30% patient drop-out rate. Increased cost and extended schedules of clinical trials,,,,Overall, GEN AI can enhance the patient experience and increase retention by providing tailored support and reducing barriers to participation.
7,Automated Data Analysis & Real time monitoring for Safety and efficacy,"1. Data Analysis: Gen AI should be able to analyze large volumes of clinical trial data quickly and accurately. It should be capable of identifying trends, correlations, and outliers in the data. 2. Reporting Acceleration: By identifying these key data points, Gen AI should accelerate the reporting process and enhance data interpretation, thereby aiding in faster and more accurate decision-making. 3. Real-time Monitoring: Gen AI should continuously monitor and analyze incoming clinical trial data in real-time. This will enable early detection of safety issues, protocol deviations, or efficacy signals. 4. Enhanced Safety and Efficiency: Through its proactive approach, Gen AI should enhance patient safety and trial efficiency.",Improved Efficiency, Enhanced Accuracy, Proactive Risk Management, Cost Savings,CLINICAL DMS,"Gen AI can analyze large volumes of clinical trial data quickly and accurately, identifying trends, correlations, and outliers that may not be apparent to human analysts. This accelerates the reporting process and enhances data interpretation. Also, Gen AI can continuously monitor and analyze incoming clinical trial data in real-time, enabling early detection of safety issues, protocol deviations, or efficacy signals. This proactive approach enhances patient safety and trial efficiency.",,,,
8,Clinical Trial Patient Digital Twin,"AI generated digital twin of patient entering clinical trial, which can be the placebo version of the patient, predicting how their condition would have evolved, if they had not received the intervention.",A better method for generating synthetic control arms,CLINICAL DMS,"Synthetic Control Arms (SCAs) add patients who were not in the original patient sample of the trial. Because SCAs can increase Type I error, use cases are limited based on regulatory guidance. Digital twins add information about patients already in the trial. Because these predicted outcomes are treated as covariates, they do not introduce bias, and can be applied to all stages of clinical development.",,,,
9,Accelerated Drug Discovery & Development,"AI-powered target identification and drug design: Leveraging machine learning models to analyze vast datasets (genomic, proteomic, chemical). This can involve using tools like AlphaFold for protein structure prediction, generative AI for molecule design, and predictive models for ADMET (Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion, Toxicity) properties.",Can identify potential drug targets and design novel molecules with desired properties.,CLINICAL DMS,,,,"Pharmaceutical Companies (e.g., Pfizer, Novartis, J&J)",
10,Inefficient Clinical Trials,"AI-driven patient recruitment and stratification: Using AI algorithms to analyze patient data (EHRs, wearables, genomic data) to identify eligible patients for clinical trials.","Accelerating recruitment and improving trial success rates, including predictive analytics to anticipate potential dropouts and proactively address them, can significantly reduce costs and improve data quality.",CLINICAL DMS,,,,"Pharmaceutical Companies, CROs (e.g., IQVIA, Parexel)","Implementation Steps (General Example - AI-driven patient recruitment): 1. Data Collection: Gather patient data from various sources (EHRs, wearables, etc.). 2. Data Preprocessing: Clean and standardize the data. 3. Model Development: Train a machine learning model to predict patient eligibility for a specific clinical trial. 4. Model Validation: Evaluate the model's performance using a separate dataset. 5. Deployment: Integrate the model into a clinical trial management system. 6. Monitoring: Continuously monitor the model's performance and retrain as needed."
11,High Failure Rates in Clinical Trials,"Predictive analytics for trial outcome prediction: Employing machine learning models to predict the likelihood of success for a clinical trial based on various factors, such as patient characteristics, study design, and historical data.","This will allow sponsors to make informed decisions about whether to proceed with a trial, potentially saving significant resources.",CLINICAL DMS,,,,"Pharmaceutical Companies, Biotech Companies",
12,Complex Data Management & Analysis,"AI-enabled data management and analytics platforms: Implementing cloud-based platforms with AI capabilities to streamline the collection, storage, and analysis of clinical trial data.","Automating data cleaning, identifying anomalies, and generating insights from complex datasets can address data quality issues quicker, leading to shorter time-to-market and quicker revenue growth (as of September, 2024, the value of a single day of delay is worth approximately $800,000 in unrealized or lost prescription drug sales and $40,000 in direct daily clinical trial costs: https://www.contractpharma.com/updates-on-the-value-of-a-day-of-delay-in-drug-development/#:~:text=Although%20the%20daily%20direct%20cost,direct%20daily%20clinical%20trial%20costs.)",CLINICAL DMS,,,,"Pharmaceutical Companies, CROs",
13,Rising R&D Costs,"AI-optimized resource allocation: Applying AI to optimize resource allocation across the drug development pipeline, identifying areas where resources can be deployed more efficiently.","Prioritizing research projects, optimizing clinical trial design, and streamlining regulatory submissions can reduce spend and accelerate time-to-market.",CLINICAL DMS,,,,"Pharmaceutical Companies, Biotech Companies",
14,Lack of Real-World Evidence,"AI-powered real-world data analytics: Utilizing AI to analyze real-world data (EHRs, claims data, patient registries) to generate insights into drug effectiveness, safety, and utilization in real-world settings.","This can support post-market surveillance, inform treatment decisions, and generate evidence for value-based pricing. With the skyrocketing costs of healthcare, value-based pricing and outcomes-based reimbursements can directly affect the average patient's pocketbook.",CLINICAL DMS,,,,"Pharmaceutical Companies, Payers, Healthcare Providers",
15,Personalized Medicine,"AI-driven personalized treatment recommendations: Using AI to analyze individual patient data (genomic, clinical, lifestyle) to predict treatment response and recommend personalized therapies.",Improving treatment outcomes and reducing adverse events can affect patients' health and significantly reduce the costs and risks of rehospitalization/s.,CLINICAL DMS,,,,"Pharmaceutical Companies, Healthcare Providers",
16,Drug Repurposing,AI-driven drug repurposing: Applying machine learning to analyze existing drug data and identify potential new uses for approved drugs.,"Accelerating the development of new treatments for unmet medical needs allows therapy delivery companies to essentially reap a ""bonus"" on their existing R&D investment with incremental/marginal costs associated with post-market or new indication trials.",CLINICAL DMS,,,,"Pharmaceutical Companies, Research Institutions",
17,Adverse Event Prediction,AI-powered pharmacovigilance: Using AI to analyze post-market surveillance data to identify potential safety signals and predict adverse events associated with drugs.,"Improving patient safety and supporting regulatory decision-making can proactively help a company's image and public perception. With increased patient confidence driven by positive patient outcomes comes a stronger foothold and beating the competition, not by making them look bad, but by looking better than them.",CLINICAL DMS,,,,"Pharmaceutical Companies, Regulatory Agencies",
18,Inference from increased number Protocol Amendments,AI-driven analysis of protocol amendments and root causes to create more robust/resilient protocols.,"Robust protocol designs that require minimal amendments will directly affect the duration and increase confidence in a company's execution of its clinical trials. Additionally, the logistical costs of communicating these amendments and getting approvals from IRBs, etc. can be minimized.",CLINICAL DMS,,"Develop a system to understand the previous protocol amendment changes and bring insights on why many protocol amendments performed and using these inferences, review the current study protocol and design to ensure protocol amendments are avoided",Senthil (231342) Hermina (165237),SANOFI,